The Government’s
Climate Strategy for
the Foreign Service
2025–2030
StrategyThe Norwegian Ministries

Contents
 Foreword 4
1.  Climate – a  defining challenge in an  unpredictable world 6
2.  Goals and guidelines 10
2.1 Goals for the strategy 11
2.2 Guidelines 12
3.  Key areas and arenas 14
3.1 Climate, peace and security  16
3.2 Climate in polar regions 18
3.3 Green transition, trade and co-operation with the EU 20
3.4 Climate in development policy 24
3.5 Climate, nature and pollution 31
3.6	 Co-operation,	partnerships	and	influence	 34
4.  A Foreign Service for climate and green transition 38
4.1 More systematic analysis of information and trends 39
4.2 Easier access to resources and expertise 40
4.3	 Effective	communication	 41
4.4 A climate and environmentally aware organisation 43
5.  Follow-up of the strategy 44
 Appendix – useful documents and links 46

Foreword
The Government has prepared this strategy at a time when  Norway
is facing its most serious security policy situation since the Second
World War. There is also deep concern about the conse quences of
the major global policy changes we are witnessing in areas such
as trade, climate change, global health, development co-operation
and democracy promotion.
Why is the Government prioritising a strategy on
the Foreign Service’s work on climate change at
a time when there are so many other major and
important priorities for foreign and development
policy? The answer is that climate change remains
the largest global challenge of the 21st century.
The serious situation we are facing as a result of
Russia’s blatant violation of international law
through its full-scale invasion of Ukraine, along
with a growing divide between the United States
and Europe on key issues we would have preferred
to avoid, does not change this. Not prioritising
climate change in Norwegian foreign and develop-
ment policy is therefore not an option for the
Government.
On the contrary, the highly challenging situation
we are facing makes it all the more important to
consider how Norway should work to ensure that
climate change remains a key issue and priority
in international co-operation in the years to come.
Because climate policy is inextricably linked to
security policy. Climate change is in itself a secu-
rity challenge that jeopardises our safety. Severe
droughts,	large-scale	floods	and	wildfires	are
increasing in frequency and intensity. In addition,
climate change also exacerbates resource scarcity
and has the potential to create new geopolitical
tensions and trigger major costs internationally.
Therefore, it is stated in the white paper on Nor-
way’s climate policy towards 2035 (Meld. St. 25
(2024–2025) (available in Norwegian only) that
the	Ministry	of	Foreign	Affairs	and	the	Foreign
Service have an important role in promoting Nor-
wegian interests internationally in the area of
climate change, and that the Government will
adopt a climate strategy for the Foreign Service.
The strategy has been prepared by the Ministry of
Foreign	Affairs	in	consultation	with	the	Ministry	of
Climate and Environment, and in close co-operation
with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries
and the Ministry of Energy. It is based on the policy
presented in Meld. St. 25 (2024–2025) and other
relevant policy documents.
Foreword4

The strategy is based on the recognition that cli-
mate change cannot be treated as an isolated
issue	or	confined	solely	to	established	negotiation
processes. The climate negotiations will continue
to be a main priority for Norway’s participation
in international co-operation on climate change.
But	how	we	address	climate	change	affects,	and
is	affected	by,	efforts	in	almost	all	areas	covered
by foreign and development policy, be it security,
energy, trade and competitiveness, humanitarian
assistance or development co-operation. There-
fore, a starting point for this strategy is that climate
change must be integrated as a cross-cutting
consideration and priority in the Foreign Service.
Although the framework for climate action is chal-
lenging, and the task ahead is substantial and
demands	intensified	efforts,	there	is	no	cause	for
defeatism, as international climate co-operation is
proving	effective.	Whereas	projections	at	the	time
of the Paris Agreement in 2015 pointed towards a
near 4°C increase above pre-industrial levels, cur-
rent estimates now indicate a rise of closer to 2°C.
This is still too much, and considerable work remains
to be done. With this strategy, the Government will
prepare the Foreign Service to do its part in the
ongoing important job of solving the climate crisis
for	the	benefit	of	current	and	future	generations.
Espen Barth Eide
Minister	of	Foreign	Affairs
Andreas Bjelland Eriksen
Minister of Climate and Environment
Åsmund Aukrust
Minister of International Development
Foreword 5

1.
Climate – a  defining
challenge in an
 unpredictable world
6

Figure 1.1: Deviation from global average temperature 1880–2020
Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
1,4
1,2
1,0
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0,0
-0,2
-0,4
-0,6
-0,8
2020
2010
2000
1990
1980
1970
1960
1950
1940
1930
1920
1910
1900
1890
1880
1870
1860
1850
Climate change is the greatest global challenge of
our time. Globally, between 3.3 and 3.6 billion
people live in areas, or in ways, that make them
highly vulnerable to the consequences of a chang-
ing climate. Climate change is happening now, and
the	damaging	effects	are	increasingly	noticeable.
Droughts,	floods,	sea	level	rise	and	degradation
of the marine environment, deforestation, bio-
diversity loss, high temperatures, extreme weather,
and natural disasters are a threat to life, health,
property and crops. Global warming contri butes
to escalating humanitarian crises, drives involuntary
migration and displacement, and increases societal
instability.	Climate	change	affects	conflict	patterns,
alliances and power relations. The associated costs
are substantial.
It concerns our safety and security. The climate
chal lenges can only be solved together. This makes
climate	change	a	defining	challenge	for	inter	national
co-operation in the 21st century, and thus also for
Norwegian foreign and development policy. The
2015 Paris Agreement sets the global framework
for countries’ climate action. States Parties agreed
to keep the increase in the global average tempera-
ture well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels,
and	to	pursue	efforts	to	limit	it	to	1.5°C.	Vulner-
abili ties vary across countries and populations,
with	the	poorest	affected	first	and	most	severely.
The most critical measure to avert the worst impacts
of climate change is rapid and deep global reduc-
tions in greenhouse gas emissions. At the same
time, it is important to work together on prevention
Climate – a defining challenge in an unpredictable world
7

of and adaptation to climate change and the man-
agement of loss and damage, especially for those
most	severely	affected.
Several global trends are making international cli-
mate co-operation more challenging and are high-
lighting the links to energy and security. Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine has led to changes in
European energy policy. The security and defence
policy consequences are such that NATO has identi-
fied	climate	change	as	a	key	challenge	with	impli-
cations for the security of its member countries.
The rapid development and major investments we
are seeing in renewable energy and cleaner tech-
nology are important for achieving the climate
targets. At the same time, changes in the inter-
national economy and trade policy, international
competitive conditions and the geopolitical balance
of	power	affect,	and	are	affected	by,	the	transition.
Multilateral forums are crucial for reach ing common
solutions to climate change. Increasing global polari-
sation is putting multilateral institutions, such as
the UN, under pressure.
Developing countries expect high-income countries
to assist them in their contribution to reducing
emissions and adapting to climate change. There
are also expectations that developing countries,
particularly the most vulnerable and exposed, will
be	supported	in	their	efforts	to	avert,	minimise
and address loss and damage resulting from climate
change. They also want co-operation and support
to ensure that the industrial and techno logical
transition takes place in a manner that safeguards
their interests and needs. Among other things, this
entails	the	need	to	mobilise	large	capital	flows	for
the climate from public and private sources.
These trends mean that climate, security, energy,
industry, competitiveness, trade and the environ-
ment must be considered in an even more inte-
grated manner than before. They also imply that
development policy will become more closely
integrated with broader foreign and security policy.
Geopolitical unrest and changing framework con-
ditions for international co-operation in general
will	affect	international	climate	co-operation.	For
example,	one	of	the	first	actions	taken	by	President
Trump when he began his second presidential term
was to announce the United States’ with drawal
from the Paris Agreement. These developments
may intensify existing disagreements over inter-
national climate co-operation in the years ahead.
It is important to work to ensure that climate re-
mains a high priority on the international agenda
and	that	systematic	efforts	are	made	to	both	cut
emissions and build climate-resilient societies.
Climate action spans virtually all areas in which
the Foreign Service operates. This strategy will
help to strengthen the Foreign Service’s ability to
safeguard and promote Norwegian interests and
priorities for climate and green transition in a
more polarised and unpredictable world.
Climate – a defining challenge in an unpredictable world
88

This strategy will help to strengthen the
 Foreign Service’s ability to safeguard and
 promote Norwegian interests and priorities
for climate and green transition in a more
 polarised and unpredictable world.
Climate – a defining challenge in an unpredictable world
99

2.
Goals and guidelines
Addressing the climate threat is a key task for the Government
in its foreign and development policy. The Foreign Service, which
consists	of	the	Ministry	of	Foreign	Affairs	and	the	foreign	ser-
vice missions, is central to the implementation of policy. The
foreign service missions play an important role as Norwegian
representatives abroad, identifying opportunities, establishing
contacts and assisting Norwegian actors, keeping the Govern-
ment informed of developments in the country of service and
raising awareness of Norway and Norwegian conditions, priori-
ties and initiatives.
10

2.1 Goals for the strategy
The main goal is for Norway to be a key actor for an ambitious
international climate co-operation and green transition, with a
Foreign Service that promotes Norwegian goals and interests by
integrating climate as a cross-cutting consideration and priority.
Targets:
 ⧽ The Foreign Service has knowledge and
expertise on climate change and the links
with other key policy areas, and how this
affects	how	we	best	can	promote
 Norwegian goals and interests.
 ⧽ We adopt a comprehensive and coordi-
nated approach to our work across the
 Foreign Service and government ministries.
 ⧽ The Foreign Service contributes to identi-
fying	opportunities	and	promoting	defined
Norwegian business interests for green
transition.
 ⧽ Through the Foreign Service, we communi-
cate	effectively	and	factually	about	Nor-
wegian climate targets and measures and
about what Norway is doing domestically
and internationally to help achieve the goals
of the Paris Agreement.
Goals and guidelines
11

2.2 Guidelines
 ⧽ Although the Foreign Service is directed by
the	Ministry	of	Foreign	Affairs,	it	serves	as
the external arm of the entire central
government administration.
 ⧽ The strategy is based on established
	policies	and	goals	for	Norway’s	efforts	on
 climate change and green transition, and
sets out how the Foreign Service is to
 contribute to their realisation.
 ⧽ Climate change is a cross-cutting conside-
ration and priority in the Foreign Service
that	must	be	integrated	and	reflected	in	its
work in all policy areas.
 ⧽ The Foreign Service’s work on climate
change is based on key principles for
 Norway’s participation in international
co- operation, including:
 ⧽ respect for international law and human
rights, including gender equality;
 ⧽ multilateralism and rules-based inter-
national co-operation that provides
predictability;
 ⧽ just transition, i.e., that climate policy
does	not	exacerbate	differences,	but
rather ensures that everyone shares in
the	benefits	of	a	low-emission	society;
 ⧽ co-operation between the public and
private sectors to solve major global
challenges.
 ⧽ The implementation of the strategy shall
allow	for	flexibility	and	adaptation	to	local
conditions and changes in the framework
conditions	for	effective	climate	diplomacy.
 ⧽ Alignment between goals, measures and
resources in the strategy must be ensured.
Goals and guidelines
12

The strategy is based on established policies
and	goals	for	Norway’s	efforts	on	climate
change and green transition, and sets out
how the Foreign Service is to contribute to
their realisation.
Goals and guidelines
13

3.
Key areas
and arenas
14

Norway – a sought-after
and ambitious partner
Norway possesses resources, capabilities, and
expertise that are both valuable and sought after.
At the same time, Norway is one of the driving
forces behind ambitious international climate
co- operation and contributes on multiple fronts.
Nor way is an important donor to the global climate
funds. Our development co-operation facilitates
in vestments in renewable energy and capacity
building in developing countries. The International
Climate and Forest Initiative contributes to reduced
and reversed loss of tropical forests and reduced
greenhouse gas emissions. Norway co-operates
with the EU and with partners in other regions.
Norwegian businesses are contributing invest -
ments, expertise and innovative solutions for
green transition. The foreign service missions
translate Norwegian interests and priorities into
concrete initiatives adapted to local conditions.
Like other countries, Norway must also strike a
balance between various considerations. Norway
is both an active promoter of ambitious inter natio-
nal	climate	co-operation	and	a	significant	petroleum
exporter.	Trade-offs	between	energy	securi	ty	and
the environment are not always easy. Norway
actively supports the decision in the climate negoti-
ations to transition away from fossil fuels in ener gy
systems in a just, orderly and equitable manner,
and implements measures to reduce its own emis-
sions from the production and use of oil and gas
and the demand for fossil fuels. Oil and gas remain
important for global energy security until fossil
energy can be replaced by renewable sources. In
particular, Norwegian production of natural gas
contributes to energy security, support for variable
renewable power generation and lower emissions
by making it possible to replace coal. Emissions
from Norwegian petroleum production are declin-
ing, and measures have been established and are
being actively pursued to further reduce emissions.
The white paper on Norway’s climate policy towards
2035 (Meld. St. 25 (2024–2025) states that the
Govern ment’s plan is about phasing out emissions,
not industries. The Government will therefore not
prepare	a	strategy	for	the	final	phase	of	Norwegian
oil and gas, but wants Norway to continue to be a
stable and predictable supplier of oil and gas pro-
duced	with	low	emissions,	and	a	significant	con-
tributor to Europe’s energy security. The Govern-
ment wants to ensure that Norway actively con-
tributes	to,	and	benefits	from,	the	global	energy
transition that is necessary to achieve the climate
targets. The fact that Norway has such an active
climate policy sets us apart from several other
petroleum exporters, makes us more relevant in
several contexts and increases interest in the solu-
tions	Norway	has	to	offer.
Norway must have the capacity, insight and exper-
tise needed to make the right connections and
trade-offs	in	key	areas	in	a	world	where	the	frame-
work conditions for the Foreign Service are chang-
ing rapidly. The foreign service missions play an
important role both as listening posts that can
provide insight into developments within their geo-
graphical area of responsibility and provide impor-
tant context for Norwegian policy development,
and as implementers of the policies that are adopted.
Key areas and arenas
15
